Okay. You want to just start by giving us the basic
information on your rank. Account name, rank, and
service number. Right. Basically. Name, John
Niffin. My rank in the Marine Corps was a sergeant.
I was in a tank unit, a Marine Corps tank unit, 3rd
Tank Battalion, Bravo Company. I went to Vietnam
in 1965 and left Vietnam in 1968. I went in the first
time with the battalion landing team, 3rd
Battalion, 9th Marines, which was the first unit
that went into Vietnam when the buildup started in
1965. Then I came out just after the Tet Offensive
in 1968.
You volunteered, right? I volunteered. Nobody
blamed but myself. Okay. Would you like to go into
maybe why you volunteered to begin with? This is
essentially greed. I was enrolled in A&M at that
time and my grades weren't really good enough to
qualify for any kind of scholarship. So I talked to
my local recruiter and he gave me this line about
the naval enlisted scientific education
program. If I enlisted in the Navy or enlisted in
the Marine Corps as a regular and I tested high
enough on the qualification test that I would
continue to gain rank in the reserves, I would be
able to go to college full-time with all my
tuition, books, and living expenses paid by the
government, and I would have a four-year
obligation to the Marine Corps upon graduation as
a commissioned officer. So that sounded pretty
good to me at the time, so I did it. But then I found
out that even though I tested high enough on the
test that they had, in 1965, they apparently
suspended the NICEF program because they needed,
I guess they needed more cannon fodder and less
officers or maybe they were already getting
enough officers. At any rate, I ended up in Vietnam
instead of back in college. Right. What was your
perception of U.S. involvement early on in 1965?
the myth that if we didn't stop them in Southeast
Asia, that they'd be putting their elephants in
their sandpans and floating them across the
Pacific Ocean and attacking San Francisco. San
Francisco next week. Yeah. I mean, you know,
growing up in Texas and all that, I think I had the
same phobia towards rampant communism as
everybody else that's brought up in this state.
And at the time, it seemed reasonable. And
besides, you know, Again, being brought up in
Texas and on John Wayne movies and all that kind of
stuff, I was sort of gobbled up with the warrior
mystique. Right. Going over there, and either I'd
get killed or I'd come back like Audie Murphy and
have all kinds of medals and be able to go to
Hollywood and make movies and never have to work
for a living for the rest of my life. Okay, I know
that during Tet you were at Hawaii, right? Well,
initially, I came back just at the start of TEP.
Initially, I was at Quong Tree as part of a
composite company. So they had moved out a unit of
Marines that was holding Quong Tree, the regular
Marines. And so they ran around and grabbed
everybody they could find, the people that were
returning from country for leave, cooks,
messmen, supply clerks, everybody. So we had sort
of a composite company. battalion of half Marines
and half Navy Seabees at Quantry. And then when we
started to push into way, they discovered that I
had a tanker MOS and the tank commander had been
wounded in the way. So I went in as his replacement.
And then after that I ended up trying to bust in the
caseload. Oh dear. You described a little bit of
the Battle of Hawaii to me. I guess the thing that
comes to mind primarily is this notion that there
was some sort of a bloodbath, you know, that the
Vietnamese or the NVA or the VC had to intimidate
and use coercion on the people, the inhabitants of
Guay. That wasn't my impression. My impression
was that everybody in the city was against, you
know, and I didn't feel they could get that sort of
cooperation through force and intimidation. And
also, uh, Initially, when we first got into
Vietnam in 1965, we were allowed to go on liberty.
And so I'd been in the way on liberty and had visited
the Citadel, which is the ancient capital and
places like that. And it was really beautiful.
There's a lot of art treasures and everything else
in there. And going in there with tanks and
everything, we just pretty well destroyed the
city. At the time, I just didn't really care. I
mean, I had too many of my friends killed, and it
didn't matter to me what I was doing to the
Vietnamese people or their culture or anything
else. But in retrospect, it bothers me a little bit
that I participated in destroying one of the
cultural capitals of the world.
You said that then you were in Cape Town after that?
No, I wasn't in Khe Sanh. That was part of the relief
column. It was a joint operation of the Marines in
the 1st Cav. It was trying to break through into Khe
Sanh on Highway 9. And it was 3rd Detainee, 4th
Marines, I believe, 26 Marines was in Khe Sanh. I
was the tank support for the infantry unit that was
trying to break into Khe Sanh.
Seems like from, you know, it's really fuzzy
looking back at it this long. It seems like it was
from February to almost early summer, I'd say May
or June before, you know, things were pretty
passed by. I mean, up until then, it was pretty much
a free fire zone. We couldn't operate except in,
you know, great strength. We'd get taken out.
Okay, by that time, troop strength in Vietnam was
about at its peak. I would say, yeah, about 10,000.
You're talking about 500,000 to 550,000 men in
Vietnam. What kind of differences in attitudes,
or if any, did you see of the people that were coming
in then from the 1 to the 10 early on? I don't know if
there's differences in attitudes in the 1 coming
in, but you have to understand something that The
old salts didn't associate with the new guys.
You
had your people that you'd been with for a while
that you could depend on, and the new guys were an
unproven quality. Plus, you didn't want to make
friends with somebody that might not be around the
next day. The newer arrivals, you didn't really
care what their attitude was.
There was an attitude with the people that had been
in the country for a while because before, you
know, we were all going to go out and make contact
with the enemy. By this time, we were sort of at the
opinion, heck with that, you know, we're going to
stay alive. So they'd send us out on these ambush
patrols and things like that. And we'd go up and set
up just far enough forward of the wires that they
wouldn't be able to hear us, you know.
play these John Wayne games anymore. We're going
to stay alive. And that wasn't initially, you
know, that was unheard of. You know, we were, heck
yeah, let's go out and fight and die for our
country. By 1968, there didn't seem to be as much of
that. The business, like what was happening later
on, you know, as I understand the early 70s, you
know, where units, whole units were refusing to
engage the army. You know, that wasn't happening.
It wasn't. It was just local small units and squads
and patrols. And it wasn't that they flat-told
their officers they weren't going to do it. They
just didn't bother to go where they were supposed
to go. One statement that's been made by a number of
different people that have talked to our class
in response to various things is the unique
experience that everybody in Vietnam has more
group experiences in other situations. It's a
very, very personal war. Everybody's experience
is different.
As opposed to perhaps World War II, where you know
who the enemy is, you know there's good and bad. Did
that hold with your experience during that time?
I'm not sure I really understand the question,
June. What
has been said on several people that were there is
that,
I guess it's kind of a sociological thing, in some
of the earlier wars where it was real clear what was
going on, you knew who you were fighting,
experiences of one person would not be that vastly
different from those of another person. Whereas,
in Vietnam,
everybody's experiences were so atomized and so
different. You might walk up on a little kid and be
blown away. You just don't know.
You know, I've heard a lot of those kind of stories.
I think there's one thing that did, people that
didn't,
that weren't Vietnami to realize, You had several
different theaters of operation, and my
impression in talking to some of the Army people
and things like that, that there were several
different types of war going on. For instance, I
never got further south than Danau, and that was
only coming in and going out. Most of my time, my
tour of duty was spent way up north, just below the
Ben Hai River. As a consequence, most of the troops
that the enemy that we were engaged in were not VC.
They weren't little kids with hand grenades that
you hear these stories about. They were regular
troops, more Vietnam troops. And so, my way of
thinking it was pretty much a traditional war.
Pretty much as much so as World War II, where you
were engaging battalion and regimental and
divisional size NVA units for the most part. As
opposed to, say, somebody that might be in the
two-quarter area, you know, down Central
Highlands, the middle of the country, that were
dealing more with local VC units, you know, that
were friendly farmers by day and VC by night. You
know, it wasn't that way. There did... I wouldn't
say it's exactly a growing experience, but there
was a change in attitude in that when I initially
went over there, you know, like I said, it was all
gung-ho, guiding country, home and corn, all that
sort of thing. And that didn't last very long, I'd
say a couple of months. And then it was just sort of
marking time until I could do something neat like
going on and on to Hong Kong or Sydney, Australia or
something like that. And then you, and real close
partner, get blown away, you know, and then it was a
revenge trip after that, you know, you just wanted
to waste goose. And I know that was my evolution, I
can't say that, you know, that I was, I feel I was
typical, but then, you know, everybody likes to
feel that they're reborn, you know. That's the way
I, my experience, you know. But also, you know,
since I was there from 65 to 68, I saw different
phases of the war. You know, from the beginning in
1965, our mission principally was the defense of
the denying airstrip. And I really had the
impression that the VC, I don't know if they even
were in the NBA,
the Americans. They just wanted to leave us alone.
And then towards 66 and 67, things got a little more
serious. We weren't making a lot of contact within
the units. My attitude sort of changed
correspondingly. But initially it was a big joke.
Here I am over in the combat zone. We're not having
fun. I get free mail and privileges. I don't have to
pay income tax. All I have to do is write three of my
letters to send it home. It was great.
And that all changed pretty rapidly. Yeah. Well,
I'd say it changed very rapidly.
By August 1965, the Marines had engaged just south
of Chula. I think it was called Operation
Starlight. And from then on, I guess the
Vietnamese finally realized that we weren't
going to go away by just ignoring us. So from then
on, our bases in Da Nang and other places like that
were being mortared and later rocketed. We were
getting mines and booby traps and things like that
in the bills. And then after I moved up north,
Okay, let's get into a little bit of your
involvement in the VDAW after you moved back. How
did you get involved in that and why? How did your
perceptions change by the time you got involved
with the VDAW? You know, when I first got back, I
thought I was some kind of a psychotic. I was real
isolated. I was going to school in Houston at San
Jacinto Junior College, but I just felt no rapport
whatsoever with the other students. I didn't
really want to socialize with them. I didn't want
them to know I was a veteran because I didn't want to
have to defend my position while I was in Vietnam
and all that kind of stuff. And I guess the first
thing that really disturbed me is I came back.
Marine Corps at the end of July of 1968. So I was back
in Houston working for the phone company and
trying to go to school by August when the
conventions were over. And watching what was
going on at the Democratic Convention was just
really upsetting to me. I mean, if I had been
fighting in Vietnam for freedom and democracy for
the Vietnamese people, then what in hell had
happened in my country while I was gone, you know,
when you can see
and stuff like that. But I still wasn't, I would
say, a really political person. That didn't
really occur until 1971, when the Vets, what later
became VVAW, went to Washington, D.C. and won
three of the medals. That just really impressed
me. And, you know, I've met Kathy and married by
then. She was telling me, instead of just sitting
back there cussing the television set every
night, you know, when Nixon would come on and talk
about what a wonderful job we were doing over
there, maybe I'll think about getting involved in
doing things. I just... didn't really want to do
it, I had tried to participate in the first student
mobe anti-war march, which I guess was in 1969 in
Houston. And I told them that I had some
photographs of way, and that they could compare
these photographs with photographs of Life
magazine, and they could see the kind of damage
The response I got from these enlightened campus
radicals was that they really didn't want any form
of professional killers in their peace march. And
I said, OK, it's fine with me. So I just pulled in my
horns and went back to work for the phone company.
And that's pretty much where I was until the BVAW
Dewey Canyon III business. And then after Dewey
Canyon III, this individual I was telling about,
Terry DeVoe,
I was wandering around campus at UT with those
signs that said, Vietnam vets, please talk to me,
trying to get people involved in VBAW. And they
were fixing to do a dedication at the LBJ library.
So we had a meeting in Austin, and Kathy talked me
into going down there. So I got together with these
people. At first, I was appalled by some of them. I
mean, some of the people that were there, I don't
know whether they were police agents or what, but
some of the suggestions of an agent
I mean, there was one guy that wanted to go to a
simulated guerrilla theater, you know, and
attack the LBJ library, you know, and throw smoke
bombs and firecrackers. And I just did not think
that was a good idea at all, you know, with the
president and everybody else on hand, you know.
Throwing anything that goes bang at them just
seemed like a real good way to get a whole lot of
people killed. But Kerry was a really exceptional
individual, and he and I had sort of an instant
rapport.
Later, he ended up coming over to my house, and we
silkscreened a whole lot of DBAW banners at our
house for the demonstration. Got to talking,
found out through his experiences and my
experience. He's from Brownfield, Texas.
Somebody grew up in Del Rio, Val Verde County. Both
of us coming from West Texas. We had a pretty good
rapport. We both knew where our heads were when we
got over there. When had he been in? He had,
I'm not sure exactly. He was a Army, he was a
Lieutenant for Green Berets, and I believe he'd
been over there essentially the same time as I had.
I'm not sure the exact date, so. Yeah, pretty
early. Well, this was 1972, you know, and he
already had long hair and a beard, so he'd been out
for a while. I think he got back approximately the
same time I did, maybe.
Well, we wanted to go throw our medals away. Well,
first of all, you know, that's the first
experience I had with the counterculture
politics. You know, I was not even left to believe
that if you were against the war, you know, that you
were all on the same side. And so we were
encountering what they call the trots, the
Socialist Workers Party and all their people. And
they were trying to co-opt everybody for their
demonstration. And then, you know, VBAW
because of the business in Washington, D.C., you
know, all the other movement organizations sort
of wanted to get there, you know, and there seemed
to be some kind of a catch. So everybody was tugging
at us, you know, and we were all kind of like we were
being pulled from one side to the other. And I don't
think any of us had any real clear-cut politics,
you know. I mean, we weren't Marxist, we weren't
Socialist, you know. We weren't even good
Democrats or Republicans. We were just out there.
So, we finally decided we were just going to
divorce ourselves from all these groups and do our
own thing.
We discussed the possibility of civil
disobedience, but non-violent civil
disobedience. We didn't want to get in trouble. We
wanted to make our point, and if there were, like
for instance, there was an injunction going that
supposedly limited us, I think a half a mile from
the LBJ library or something like that. So we just
decided, well, that's a crock, you know, that's
clearly unconstitutional. So we weren't doing a
baby injunction. That was one of the points the
trots were making. We were going to get everybody
arrested if we crossed the deadline.
But we approached the barricade and talked to some
Secret Service people and told them what we were
there for and that we had no intention of
threatening anybody, you know, but we didn't want
to make a political statement. We wanted to turn
our decorations in. He says that there's no way
that we weren't going to cross the barricade. He
says, well... about if we delegate one individual
and all you guys can escort him up there and he can
act on behalf of all of us. So that's not going to
work either. So, you know, there is some talk
about, well, let's force the barricade, and we
finally decided that wasn't going to be
productive, so we just chunked our mills across
the barricade. The Secret Service was busy
collecting them all up, and I guess Tech and Cereal
is going to be staying to find out who we're going to
work with.
And after that, after spending the day at the LBJ
library and watching people getting tear gassed
and cops chasing people down the street, my wife
and I ended up going on a run with a bandito's
motorcycle.
So there were some problems there that day. I
wouldn't say it was any serious problems, but
there were a few people that were throwing things,
and the cops were responding. There was some tear
gas set off at one point. I don't really know how
many people were arrested, but it wasn't any of the
big mass arrests that occurred later on.
The first one I ever did, I guess, I can't say
whether it was typical or not for the time, but it
seemed pretty typical. In general, it was pretty
peaceful. Were you involved in the VVAW even
ongoingly after that? Well, I sort of got conned
into taking the position initially the resource
person for the local University of Texas, and then
later the Austin chapter coordinator of Vietnam
Veterans Against the War. And then Terry, by that
time, was having some problems. And so in December
of 71, Terry resigned. And I found myself as the
state coordinator for the regional coordinator.
Did you ever have any personal problems arise as a
result of that? Oh, yeah. In fact, all of my arrest
records all stem from my involvement with the VAW.
Initially, on Veterans Day 1971,
We were arrested for parading without a permit on
the sidewalk in Killeen. And then later in 1972,
when they started the offensive, the Vietnamese
started their 1972 offensive. And Nixon was
telling everybody that he'd do anything to stop
the Vietnamese incursion in the south with the
exception of reintroduction of ground troops and
the use of nuclear weapons. VVAW had a lot of guys in
active duty, you know, that were soul brothers of
the organization. So they were telling us, you
know, we were getting these calls from all these
military bases and they were telling us what their
alert status was, what their deployment status
was. And when you put it all together, it became
very apparent that what was happening was that
Nixon was...
started compiling all this as sort of an
organizational thing. And that started a bunch of
demonstrations. And I got arrested for
aggravated assault on a police officer in one of
those demonstrations in Austin. And then it sort
of culminated in a conspiracy case. BVAW was
planning to attend the Democratic National
Convention. I can't speak for the organization,
but I myself had no intention of going to the
Republican Convention. What was the point? We all
knew who the Republican candidate was going to be.
And whereas you might be able to influence the
Democratic candidates, there was no way you were
going to change Nixon's mind. So we were holding
meetings and discussing what to do about the
Democratic convention. And it was decided that we
would have a convoy from... There was essentially
three branches, one coming down the east coast,
one coming across from the west coast, and one
coming down from the midwest off of Virgin and
Florida. We called it the last patrol. We'd go to
the convention. We were having meetings and
discussions on this. One of our meetings was
infiltrated by an agent provocateur, a guy named
Bill Linger.
saying we knew we were on trial for conspiracy, but
the government's charge was that we were
inspiring to disrupt the Republican convention.
And the grand jury sat during the Democratic
convention, so all of us were... It exactly
coincided with the Democratic Convention. Our
subpoenas ordered us to appear at the day the
Democratic Convention started, and we were
released from subpoena when the government had
the nomination. So we were held in Tallahassee at
the other end of the state, all the leadership. And
I sort of felt like the government felt that VBAW
was like IBM or something. If you get the board of
directors and take them off someplace, then you
cripple the company. Since VBAW didn't work that
way at all, we were a bunch of anarchists. The mere
fact that you held the regional coordinators
someplace didn't change one bit what was going on
with the organization because they were still
doing what they wanted. The government had it
conspiratorial.
But at any rate, they ended up charging us with a
conspiracy to cross our state lines to decide a
riot at the Republican National Convention. And
they said that as part of that conspiracy that we
were going to use slingshots and cherry bombs and
fried marbles and crossbows against highly
assembled police and military power at the
convention. In other words, you know, we were
going to be down there shooting at the 82nd
Airborne and the FBI and the Dade County Sheriff's
Department, you know, with slingshots and
crossbows.
I was, save one of the defendants, had been in the
military and had served in Vietnam. I've got to say
one thing about the government, they do teach you
how to use all these neat weapons, you know, so why
couldn't they come up with anything better to use
than stone shots, cherry bombs, crossbows, and
pride marbles? But at any rate, they went ahead
with this farce, you know, and screwed around for a
year with motions on motions to suppress motions
and things like that. Finally put us on trial about
a year later, and after about a month-long trial,
the jury came back with an earnest verdict of
acquittal, and we were all cut loose.
It was held in Gainesville, Florida. Everybody
was acquitted.
Which is good because the way conspiracy works, if
they had managed to convict one of us, they would
have convicted us all. Conspiracy is not a crime as
much as a thought, which makes it so dangerous. So
if they had been able to prove that one of us had
committed a crime, then that could have convicted
us all.
That's the whole thing about conspiracy. You
know, I often thought when they tried Mitchell and
Stans for conspiracy, you know, The government
had lost all their other conspiracy cases, you
know, the Chicago case, the Oregon case, and the
Seattle case, and our case. I often thought that
some hot shot lawyer in the Justice Department was
sitting there saying, you know, we've got to try
and mention them stands for something the
American people want most, and let them off for
nothing. So somebody says, well, let's try them
for conspiracy. We never won on that one before.
And lo and behold, the first time they get a
conviction on conspiracy is against Mitchell and
Stanton. Sort of an ironic justice thing.
But did that case have a name? Yeah.